The correspondence between affine group schemes and Hopf algebras (#105)
leanprover-community/blog: posts/affine-group-scheme-hopf-algebra.md

* The unexpected prerequisite of algebraic tori was recently cleared;
* We are looking for contributors to help with the second phase of the project,
  i.e. toric geometry and its relation to convex geometry.

<!-- TEASER_END -->

We first explain what a *variety* is.
This motivates *algebraic groups* and *Hopf algebras*,
where the latter are a way to approach the former algebraically,
using the *correspondence* between *affine* algebraic groups and Hopf algebras.
Finally, we apply this newly gained understanding to the construction
of the *perfect pairing* between *characters* and *cocharacters* of a torus.

In the last section, we describe how to contribute to the second phase of the project.
We encourage readers to skip straight to that section if ever they get lost reading the previous,
as the second phase will require very different mathematics to the first.

All explanations in this blog post are mathematical.
Technical talk is relegated to the companion article on arXiv.

# Varieties

Varieties are the basic objects of study in algebraic geometry.
A variety should be understood as a *geometric space* which one can understand through *algebra*.

> In a vague sense, varieties are an algebraic analogue to manifolds.

Reviewer: I agree with this strongly, modulo the nitpick that varieties describe a much broader class of spaces than just those that are also manifolds.

3. The inverse morphism $\iota: (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n \to (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n$
  given by $\iota(t_1,\dots,t_n) = (t_1^{-1},\dots,t_n^{-1})$.

The usual notation for the standard $n$-dimensional algebraic torus is $\mathbb G_m^n$,
or $\mathbb G_m$ in the special case where $n = 1$.

> In Toric, we defined the group structure on $\mathbb G_m^n$ using the Yoneda embedding.
  The torus is
  [`SplitTorus`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=AlgebraicGeometry.Scheme.SplitTorus#doc)
  and its group structure is given by
  [`Diag.grp_ClassAsOver`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=AlgebraicGeometry.Scheme.Diag.grp_ClassAsOver#doc).

# Hopf algebras

Since complex affine varieties correspond to commutative $\mathbb{C}$-algebras,
some $\mathbb{C}$-algebras with extra structure should correspond to algebraic groups.

What are they? Let's figure it out.

Recall that maps $\operatorname{Spec} R \to \operatorname{Spec} S$ of affine varieties
are in bijection with maps $S \to R$ of their corresponding rings in the opposite direction.
Also note that we can interpret the product of affine varieties
in terms of the tensor product of rings:

> $\operatorname{Spec} R \otimes \operatorname{Spec} S$ is isomorphic to $\operatorname{Spec} (R \otimes S)$.

Author: Fixed both

  In particular we have $X(\mathbb G_m^n) \cong \mathbb Z^n$ (contravariantly) as
  [`charTorus`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=AlgebraicGeometry.Scheme.charTorus#doc).

Similarly, given $(m_1, \dots, m_n) \in \mathbb Z^n$,
we can define a cocharacter of $\mathbb G_m^n$ via
$$
    t \longmapsto (t^{m_1},\dots, t^{m_n}).
$$
and again all cocharacters of $\mathbb G_m^n$ arise in this way,
so $X^*(\mathbb G_m^n) \cong \mathbb Z^n$.

Hence the character-cocharacter pairing corresponds to a bilinear pairing
$$
    \mathbb Z^n \times \mathbb Z^n \longrightarrow \mathbb Z.
$$
which turns out to nothing else than the usual inner product on $\mathbb Z^n$:
$$
    \langle\cdot, \cdot\rangle := (\mathbf{a}, \mathbf{b}) \mapsto \sum_i a_i b_i
$$

In particular, the two maps
$$
    \mathbb Z^n \longrightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(\mathbb Z^n, \mathbb Z) \\
    \mathbf{a} \mapsto \langle\mathbf{a}, \cdot\rangle \\
    \mathbf{b} \mapsto \langle\cdot, \mathbf{b}\rangle
$$
are both bijective.
This is what it means for the pairing to be **perfect**.

> In Toric, we have shown that this pairing is perfect and computed it to be the usual inner product

>   after a suitable identification of $X(\mathbb G_m^n)$ with $\mathbb Z^n$.

Author: I know, and this is not how we did it in Lean, but I think the concrete explanation has pedagogical value here. I've changed the sentence in a way that hopefully clarifies that this is merely an example.

  given by $\Delta(t) = t \otimes t$.
4. The antipode $S: \mathbb{C}[t,t^{-1}] \to \mathbb{C}[t,t^{-1}]$ given by $S(t) = t^{-1}$.

> The correspondence between algebraic groups and Hopf algebras is now fully formalized in Toric.
  We have proven that there is an equivalence of categories
  between commutative Hopf algebras and affine group schemes.
  $\Spec$ as a functor from Hopf algebras to affine group schemes is
  [`hopfSpec`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=hopfSpec#doc)
  and the fact that it's fully faithful is
  [`hopfSpec.fullyFaithful`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=hopfSpec.fullyFaithful#doc).

# Application: Pairing

For a commutative algebraic group $G$, there are two important notions:
1. A **character** of $G$ is a group homomorphism $G\to\mathbb G_m$.
  We write $X(G) := \operatorname{Hom}(G, \mathbb G_m)$ for the group of characters.
2. A **cocharacter**, aka **one-parameter subgroup**, of $G$
  is a group homomorphism $\mathbb G_m\to G$.
  We write $X^*(G) := \operatorname{Hom}(\mathbb G_m, G)$ for the group of cocharacters.

Note that characters and cocharacters form genuine honest-to-god groups,

> not merely group objects in some category.

Reviewer 2: I think the point is to clarify that other "groups" are not "groups of sets". 
And the last sentence is false in the sense that groups are still "group objects in some category" and is inaccurate in the sense that "group objects in some category" are groups with more structure and are thus a stronger notion than just a group.

* The unexpected prerequisite of algebraic tori was recently cleared;
* We are looking for contributors to help with the second phase of the project,
  i.e. toric geometry and its relation to convex geometry.

<!-- TEASER_END -->

We first explain what a *variety* is.
This motivates *algebraic groups* and *Hopf algebras*,
where the latter are a way to approach the former algebraically,
using the *correspondence* between *affine* algebraic groups and Hopf algebras.
Finally, we apply this newly gained understanding to the construction
of the *perfect pairing* between *characters* and *cocharacters* of a torus.

In the last section, we describe how to contribute to the second phase of the project.
We encourage readers to skip straight to that section if ever they get lost reading the previous,
as the second phase will require very different mathematics to the first.

All explanations in this blog post are mathematical.
Technical talk is relegated to the companion article on arXiv.

# Varieties

Varieties are the basic objects of study in algebraic geometry.
A variety should be understood as a *geometric space* which one can understand through *algebra*.

> In a vague sense, varieties are an algebraic analogue to manifolds.

Reviewer 2: If you are restricting this blog post to complex varieties this would be a good place to mention it too. Something like "In this blog post we will only consider schemes over $\mathbb{C}$, i.e. ones whose polynomial equations have coefficient in $\mathbb{C}$".

A **group object** $G \in \mathsf{C}$ then consists of:
1. A **unit morphism** $\eta : \mathbf{1}_C \to G$.
2. A **multiplication morphism** $\mu : G \otimes G \to G$.
3. An **inverse morphism** $\iota : G \to G$.

making the following diagrams commute:
<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagrams**</span>

If the following further diagram commutes, then we have a **commutative group object**:
<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagram**</span>

Analogously to group homomorphisms, if $G$ and $H$ are group objects,
then a morphism $f : G \to H$ is a **group morphism** if the following two diagrams commute:
<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagrams**</span>

A group object in the category of varieties is called an *algebraic group*.
In other categories of interest, such as the categories of sets/topological spaces/smooth manifolds,
group objects recover the notions of a group/topological group/Lie group.

Beware that those examples are misleading in that topological groups and Lie groups are
honest-to-god groups with extra structure.
This elementwise interpretation of a group object completely breaks down in categories

> such as the category of schemes where there is no notion of "elements".

Reviewer 2: I suggest to ditch this portion. This is still wrong. There is still a valid notion of elements (or points) on schemes, and group schemes are exactly groups (on the points) satisfying some property (e.g. multiplication being polynomials, and some other base-change compatible conditions) just like Lie groups are groups (on the points of the manifold) satisfying some property (e.g. multiplication being smooth).

We first give an idea of what a *scheme* is.
This motivates *group schemes* and *Hopf algebras*,
where the latter are a way to approach the former algebraically,
using the *correspondence* between *affine* group schemes and Hopf algebras.
Finally, we apply this newly gained understanding to the construction
of the *perfect pairing* between *characters* and *cocharacters* of a torus.

In the last section, we describe how to contribute to the second phase of the project.
We encourage readers to skip straight to that section if ever they get lost reading the previous ones,
as the second phase will require very different mathematics to the first.

All explanations in this blog post are mathematical.
Technical talk is relegated to a companion article that will be published on arXiv.

# Schemes

Schemes are the basic objects of study in algebraic geometry.
A scheme is a space that locally looks like the zero locus of a polynomial equation,
just like a manifold is a space that locally looks like a euclidean space.
Schemes are therefore the algebraic analogue of manifolds.

The polynomial equations appearing in the definition of schemes can be over any commutative ring,

> but for simplicity we will assume that they are over $\mathbb C$.

Author: It shows just fine for me, yes

then morphisms $\mathrm{Spec}\ R \to \mathrm{Spec}\ S$
exactly correspond to ring homomorphisms $S \to R$.

$\mathbb A^n$ is in fact isomorphic to $\mathrm{Spec}\ \mathbb C[X_1, \dots, X_n]$,
the spectrum of the polynomial ring in $n$ variables.
Similarly, $\mathbb G_m^n$ is isomorphic to $\mathrm{Spec}\ \mathbb C[X_1^{\pm 1}, \dots, X_n^{\pm 1}]$,
the spectrum of multivariate Laurent series in $n$ variables.
The natural inclusion $\mathbb C[X_1, \dots, X_n] \hookrightarrow \mathbb C[X_1^{\pm 1}, \dots, X_n^{\pm 1}]$
corresponds to an embedding $\mathbb G_m^n \hookrightarrow \mathbb A^n$ with dense image
(picture this as $(\mathbb C^\times)^n$ sitting in $\mathbb C^n$).

# Group schemes

Recall the definition of a group. A *group structure* on a set $G$ consists of:
1. An **identity** $e \in G$.
2. A **multiplication** $(\cdot * \cdot) : G \times G \to G$.
3. An **inverse** $(\cdot^{-1}) : G \to G$.

respecting the following *group axioms*:
1. For all $g \in G$, $e * g = g$ (and $g * e = g$).
2. For all $g, h, k \in G$, $(g * h) * k = g * (h * k)$.
3. For all $g \in G$, $g^{-1} * g = e$ (and $g * g^{-1} = e$).

A group structure can be described purely in terms of maps between

> $G, G \times G$ and the one element set $\{*\}$,

Author: If you open the file in vscode, then you can `Ctrl + K V` to open a markdown preview. There's also 
![a button in the top right](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/37e1456c-b424-48ca-941b-0995443a8e5c).

meaning that we can reinterpret groups in any category $\mathsf{C}$
where $(\cdot \times \cdot)$ and $\{*\}$ make sense,
i.e. in any category with a binary product $(\cdot \otimes \cdot)$ and terminal object $\mathbf{1}_C$.
A **group object** $G \in \mathsf{C}$ then consists of:
1. A **unit morphism** $\eta : \mathbf{1}_C \to G$.
2. A **multiplication morphism** $\mu : G \otimes G \to G$.
3. An **inverse morphism** $\iota : G \to G$.

making the following diagrams commute:
<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagrams**</span>

As an exercise try to come up with the diagrams that define a *commutative* group object.

Analogously to group homomorphisms, if $G$ and $H$ are group objects,

> then a morphism $f : G \to H$ is a **group homomorphism** if the following two diagrams commute:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then a morphism $f : G \to H$ is a **group scheme homomorphism** if the following two diagrams commute:
```

Author: That suggestion makes no sense, we haven't defined group schemes by this point

<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagrams**</span>

A group object in the category of schemes is called a *group scheme*.
In other categories of interest, such as the categories of sets/topological spaces/smooth manifolds,
group objects recover the notions of a group/topological group/Lie group.

Following this, the **standard $n$-dimensional algebraic torus** is defined as
the scheme $\mathbb G_m^n$ along with (the scheme morphisms corresponding to):
1. The unit morphism $\eta: \{*\} \to (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n$ taking $* \mapsto (1,\dots,1)$.
2. The multiplication morphism $\mu: (\mathbb{C}^\times)^{n} \times (\mathbb{C}^\times)^{n} \to (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n$
  given by $\mu((t_1,\dots,t_n),(s_1,\dots,s_n)) = (t_1s_1,\dots,t_n s_n)$.
3. The inverse morphism $\iota: (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n \to (\mathbb{C}^\times)^n$

>   given by $\iota(t_1,\dots,t_n) = (t_1^{-1},\dots,t_n^{-1})$.

Reviewer 2: We did say in the start that the our "scheme" is by definition $$\mathbb{C}$$-schemes. So in particular "Category of schemes" means the category of $$\mathbb{C}$$-schemes, and products and terminal objects are both in this category as well. Or is this approach bad?

On the other hand we should definitely say $$\mathbb{C}$$-algebra instead of rings.

2. A **counit homomorphism** $\varepsilon: R\to\mathbb{C}$.
3. A **comultiplication homomorphism** $\Delta: R \to R \otimes R$.
4. An **antipode homomorphism** $S: R \to R$.

And we ask that these satisfy the same diagrams as for a group object,
except that the arrows are reversed:
<span style="color:red">**TODO: Add diagrams**</span>

Algebras with this structure are called *Hopf algebras*.
There is a notion of Hopf algebra homomorphisms,
which are in one-to-one correspondence with group scheme homomorphisms.

The 1-dimensional torus corresponds to the Hopf algebra defined as:
1. The $\mathbb{C}$-algebra $\mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}]$.
2. The counit $\varepsilon: \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}] \to \mathbb{C}$ given by $\varepsilon(t) = 1$.
3. The comultiplication $\Delta: \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}] \to \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}] \otimes_{\mathbb C} \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}]$
  given by $\Delta(t) = t \otimes t$.
4. The antipode $S: \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}] \to \mathbb C[t^{\pm 1}]$ given by $S(t) = t^{-1}$.

> In Toric, we have proven that $\mathrm{Spec}$ is a fully faithful functor
  from commutative Hopf algebras to group schemes,
  and that its essential image are the affine group schemes.
  In other words,

>   the categories of commutative Hopf algebras and affine group schemes are equivalent.

Reviewer 2: Most results are for arbitrary rings. Some only work for fields or domains (the perfect pairing stuff). 

But some abuse of notation that we assumed in this text might only works for algebraically closed fields, e.g. saying that the points on $$\mathbb{G}_m$$ is $$k^\times$$ might not be true depending on what "points" means. So to be safe we just wrote $$\mathbb{C}$$. Or perhaps this is more confusing?

using the *correspondence* between *affine* group schemes and Hopf algebras.
Finally, we apply this newly gained understanding to the construction
of the *perfect pairing* between *characters* and *cocharacters* of a torus.

In the last section, we describe how to contribute to the second phase of the project.
We encourage readers to skip straight to that section if ever they get lost reading the previous,
as the second phase will require very different mathematics to the first.

All explanations in this blog post are mathematical.
Technical talk is relegated to the companion article on arXiv.

# Schemes

Schemes are the basic objects of study in algebraic geometry.
A scheme is a space that locally looks like some polynomial equation,
just like a manifold is a space that locally looks like some euclidean space.
Schemes are therefore the algebraic analogue of manifolds.

The polynomial equations appearing in the definition of schemes can be over any commutative ring,
but for simplicity we will assume that they are over $\mathbb C$.

The complex numbers $\mathbb C$ and its unit group $\mathbb C^\times$ can both be realized as a scheme.

> They are in this context referred to as the **affine line** $\mathbb A$  and **multiplicative group** $\mathbb G_m$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They are in this context referred to as the **affine line** $\mathbb A$ and **multiplicative group** $\mathbb G_m$.
```

This motivates *group schemes* and *Hopf algebras*,
where the latter are a way to approach the former algebraically,
using the *correspondence* between *affine* group schemes and Hopf algebras.
Finally, we apply this newly gained understanding to the construction
of the *perfect pairing* between *characters* and *cocharacters* of a torus.

In the last section, we describe how to contribute to the second phase of the project.
We encourage readers to skip straight to that section if ever they get lost reading the previous,
as the second phase will require very different mathematics to the first.

All explanations in this blog post are mathematical.
Technical talk is relegated to the companion article on arXiv.

# Schemes

Schemes are the basic objects of study in algebraic geometry.
A scheme is a space that locally looks like some polynomial equation,
just like a manifold is a space that locally looks like some euclidean space.
Schemes are therefore the algebraic analogue of manifolds.

The polynomial equations appearing in the definition of schemes can be over any commutative ring,
but for simplicity we will assume that they are over $\mathbb C$.

> From the complex numbers $\mathbb C$ and the non-zero complex numbers $\mathbb C^\times$,
> one can make the classical examples of the schemes $\mathbb G_a$ and $\mathbb G_m$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the complex numbers $\mathbb C$ and the non-zero complex numbers $\mathbb C^\times$,
one can make the classical examples of the schemes $\mathbb A$ and $\mathbb G_m$.
```

> From the complex numbers $\mathbb C$ and the non-zero complex numbers $\mathbb C^\times$,
> one can make the classical examples of the schemes $\mathbb G_a$ and $\mathbb G_m$.
> They are in this context referred to as the **additive group** and **multiplicative group**.
> Their products $\mathbb G_a^n$ and $\mathbb G_m^n$ are called
> **affine space** and **algebraic torus** respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The complex numbers $\mathbb C$ and its unit group $\mathbb C^\times$ can both be realized as a scheme.
They are in this context referred to as the **affine line** $\mathbb A$  and **multiplicative group** $\mathbb G_m$.
Their products $\mathbb G_a^n$ and $\mathbb G_m^n$ are called
**affine space** and **algebraic torus** respectively.
```

  [`isPerfPair_charPairing`](https://yaeldillies.github.io/Toric/docs/find/?pattern=AlgebraicGeometry.Scheme.isPerfPair_charPairing#doc)
  and the computation is <span style="color:red">**TODO: Do the computation**</span>.

This perfect pairing is very important:
It allows us to talk about cones in $X^*(\mathbb G_m^n)$ and their duals in $X_*(\mathbb G_m^n)$,
i.e. it unlocks convex geometry on characters and cocharacters.

Cones in $\mathbb Z^n$ turn out to be in exact correspondence with *affine toric varieties*,
which are the subject of the first chapter of Cox-Little-Schenck.

# How to contribute

Now that the theory of tori is off the ground, work on toric varieties can truly start.
The next milestone is that the functor $M \mapsto \operatorname{Spec} \mathbb C[M]$
from the category of affine monoids (finitely generated cancellative commutative monoids)
to the category of affine toric varieties is essentially surjective.

Simultaneously, the perfect pairing between characters and cocharacters is begging
for the theory of convex cones to be developed.
The end result here is that affine monoids in $\mathbb Z^n$ are equivalent
to convex polyhedral cones in $\mathbb R^n$.

> The second phase of the project will therefore run on two tableaux simultaneously:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second phase of the project will therefore run on two fronts simultaneously:
```

> * The **algebraic geometry** side involving Hopf algebras, group schemes, Yoneda,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The **algebraic geometry** side involving Hopf algebras, group schemes, 
```
